I'm so thrilled to be introducing our
next speaker Victoria Ivanova um who
I've had the uh privilege to get to hang
out with a little bit off uh off the
clock and I can speak uh very personally
to how brilliant she is uh Victoria is a
curator writer and strategic consultant
uh with a shadow passion for tennis uh
she is currently working with the
serpentine arts and Technologies team as
R&D strategist while completing a
practice
based PhD wow um her core focus is on
systemic and infrastructural conditions
that shape socioeconomic political and
institutional realities um and I'm so
thrilled to hear what she has to say uh
welcome
[Music]
Victoria hi thanks for the lovely
introduction um Also may just say how
smoothly all the AV is running I think
I've never been to um uh a conference or
a series of public events where you
didn't have to do any prep and you know
you show up and everything's working
incredible um so and that's kind of on
topic because I'll be talking about uh
future art
ecosystems which is a project that uh
grew out of serpentine Arts Technologies
Department um and something I've been
working on well at present I guess for
the past six years but potentially for
the entire duration of my tenure in the
art domain if for the last 15 years um
so for those of you uh who are not aware
of serpentine is a public Arts
organization in London dedicated to
supporting Contemporary Art practices so
it's primarily used as uh or primarily
functions as um an exhibition venue it
works with contemporary artists um um
and it's also kind of a site for sort of
public discourse around various dour
topics
um so futur ecosystems is something as I
said that grew out of serpentine however
you know frequently people have hard
time kind of reconciling uh the very uh
sort of organization filic or like
organization designing um aspects of
future art ecosystems project with a
contemporary art organization and its
mandate um and that's not really a
coincidence because uh the roots of
Futurity ecosystems are in the idea that
you know the kinds of Institutions that
we have today to support uh art practice
might not necessarily be the best types
of Institutions to support emerging
practice for example uh in the space of
uh art and
technology and one of the reasons that
such institutions might not be as you
know so well equipped to support art and
Technology practices is because there's
something about the kind of emerging
nature of what art and techn production
does that is not really captured by the
organizational form of uh a museum which
we have obviously inherited from the
19th century and that uh focuses on very
specific modalities of infrastructural
support uh and these modalities
infrastructural support uh tend to uh be
focused on presentation and
dissemination of um artistic output and
presentation of artworks and exhibitions
and statements about exhibitions in the
form of kind of curatorial packaging to
audiences
um however you know we've you know we've
talked about different art and
Technology practice already today and
it's clear that there is a lot that goes
on uh when it comes to the production
process of Art and technology that
there's uh for sure there is an output
that can be seen an exhibition space but
there's something about the process of
developing an art and Technology project
uh that could potentially have larger uh
consequences for uh the way that you
know in society we we understand
technology the way that technology is
shaped in the commercial domain and yet
somehow cultural institutions are not
really able to support that production
uh
Foundation um and so the origin of
future ecosystems has been really in
this kind of question how can a 21st
century cultural Institution
um kind of tried to reconfigure itself
or tried at the very least uh sort of
start rethinking uh the basic premises
on which um its kind of mission has been
formed in order to be able to adjust to
the kind of ever evolving Dynamic uh
processes of Art and Technology
production um and so in the context of
serpentine um kind of the art and
technology part of the program uh really
emerged in 2010s with uh my close
colleague who's currently coll the
organization at this stage Ben Vickers
he was the first digital curator uh at
Serpentine one of the first digital
curators in any UK public institution
more
generally um and he came to uh serenton
with a proposition uh of um working with
artists very closely specifically at the
kind of production stages of uh
developing their works and to uh allow
for artists to explore in a very
ambitious ways kind of new emerging
technological media uh that you know
were kind of obviously being um kind of
circulated in society through commercial
products uh but which potentially you
know could have kind of larger um
repercussions in terms of the impacts
that you know we're seeing today with
kind of more advanced forms of these
Technologies whether that's you know
simulation run environments in AI uh
kind of the the nature of uh sort of the
chatbot
interactions uh or you know the kind of
basically what Eric has just spoken
about a few minutes ago um so here here
are some of the kind of early Works um
that Serpentine has supported and um in
the process of developing this works
kind of this um premise that um there
was indeed a lot to be
researched you know as these Works were
being produced that could be shared with
society and with other organizations
more widely that The Art institution
wasn't really able to support so um they
sertin put out a call for a
practice-based PhD um to kind of
investigate what would be an adequate
organizational form to support the kind
of R&D phases
of um artistic production and to extract
insights from these R&D phases in order
to be able to share them more widely
with as I said kind of uh other societal
actors whether these uh these are
different fields or uh potentially other
organizations um and so when I so long
story short uh I was I became that uh
kind of practice based PhD um C
candidate uh who started working with at
that stage it was quite a small team of
only three people that has grown ever
since the Arts technology team at
Serpentine and the kind of initial brief
that was put to me was to think through
a
um set of operational processes that
would need to be integrated into the
organization in order to allowed it to
have this sort of reflexive space that
is often missing uh in organizations
that go from you know one project to the
next from one exhibition or discursive
event to the next um and for that
reflects the space to become uh kind of
this new
fledgling um infrastructural support for
art and Technology production that had
an R&D imperative rather than just an
imperative to kind of show final
artworks to larger
audiences um and
so what start what started happening was
we started prototyping various um Labs
R&D Labs that were dedicated to insights
that were produced in previous
commission projects and collaborations
with artists so we started with a few um
kind of the first Labs were a legal lab
kind of looking into the various legal
issues that exist in art technology
collaborations we had a creative AI lab
and still have a creative AI lab uh that
was looking at the kind of specific um
R&D insights that artistic um
engagements with uh AI could how these
could be shared with uh the larger
ecosystem um and through the development
of these Labs which became highly
networked projects we were working with
universities we're working with external
principal investigators and advisers um
we were kind of gathering a lot of
insight and um
a lot of pointers as to what was
necessary in order to kind of augment
the existing cultural infrastructure to
better support the development of these
capabilities and so the idea was born to
start um publishing a strategic briefing
on an annual basis that would share kind
of the results of this work but which
would also kind of expand into um into
um ations with other peers and
colleagues in the kind of art technology
domain um as well as in the context of
policy and uh kind of industry settings
and so future art ecosystems
Publications became this kind of annual
ways of checking in with our R&D work
crosschecking it with other uh
colleagues in um yeah in other
institutions and in adjacent spaces and
Publishing findings on topics that were
um being discussed a lot but perhaps
there wasn't so much consideration about
the kind of longtail uh questions
associated with these topics so for
example uh in 2023 we published uh a
strategic briefing on Art and
decentralized Technologies obviously
kind of 2020 to about 2022 I guess were
really hot years for the evolution of
the web 3 space and um you know nfts
were sort of you know
everywhere in terms of um the central
point of reference for uh the art domain
um and so what we tried to do in future
art ecosystems publication is to
actually kind of leave the nft
conversation aside and to look at
blockchain Technologies from a more uh
long-term perspective and to Think
Through the affordances of blockchain
Technologies for reconfiguring the art
field more generally um so that's sort
of just one examp example uh of how
these Publications function uh they're
not really kind of meant to be a
commentary on the very present moment
but there are trying to take a sort of
technological idea and a narrative
that's being developed in the present
moment and to look Beyond like the
various uh hyped positions that are
being circulated um yeah in in the
current
moment um in the process of so you know
we started publishing these uh um
briefing in 2020 and so we have
interviewed you know over 200 people
we've held numerous closed and
roundtables uh we have been able to do
like policy briefs in the UK context we
have started collaborating with
organizations that Arts organizations
typically don't collaborate with uh
whether these a cific uh organizations
or law firms that are looking into
various issues around legal Innovation
um so Fay became this really interesting
future system this like very interesting
incubation space for thinking about um
the contributions that the artfield can
make to society and from a very
different perspective than we usually
think of the art field when we're
thinking about you know institutions
that do shows that are creating uh a
certain kind of Legacy narrative around
what's important in culture uh you know
who are the critical artists of the day
etc etc um and so it you know after
in 2023 we decided to sort of take stock
of all of the like incredible amount of
work that has happened and uh all the
sort of new opportunities that were
arising for us and to think what did we
want future art ecosystems um to become
in the future and you know we realized
that it's great to be doing these like
annual reports and to be uh sharing
insights and thinking about uh you know
what infrastructure is necessary in
order to make uh the art field more
empowered powered but would also like to
become more of a platform or an
incubation space that is actually
prototyping these infrastructures um and
so we came up with these kind of four
main vectors that we see as the key
areas that require infrastructural
development in the art field uh
particularly in relationship to Art and
Technology production so um the first
one is Advanced production capabilities
and it's like a fairly obvious Point uh
that in order for artists and for the
art field to kind of have agency within
a highly technologized societal context
uh it is important that there kind of
there's like in-house capacity and by
in-house I mean within the cultural
domain to uh produce ambitious work
rather than to always be reliant on the
technology sector to provide uh the
technological infrastructure uh which
you know is already kind of I I don't
want to use use this word corrupted but
kind of in a kind of neutralized way
corrupted by the ideas that artists want
to challenge um however you know given
the scale of investment that's required
to have such production capabilities no
single Arts organization can do it alone
and so uh one area that we're really
focused on is developing protocols for
organizational interoperability and by
that what we mean is um there is a need
for organizations to collaborate on a
much closer kind of basis and to be
contributing um bespoke kind of
capabilities that they have towards the
ecosystem in a way that the ecosystem
can um uh can sort of acknowledge it and
not and
also basically for the funding to come
out not just for individual
organizations but for ecosystemic
projects so for example in the UK uh we
have been developing this idea of a
shared kpi between different
organizations that are trying to um yeah
commit themselves to multi-year projects
and in this way uh by having shared kpis
between organizations you know we're
able to talk to funders who will fund a
more ambitious projects across five
years than rather rather than always
being limited to uh you know ad hoc
funding for like very kind of yeah small
scale projects um simultaneously you
know uh obvious Point art economy really
sucks
uh it sucks because uh you know artists
are generally trapped between uh lack of
opportunities within the Art Market uh
and the lack of proper funding from the
state so the development of new
ownership distribution models is a very
critical kind of foundational piece for
any future art ecosystems that's that's
clearly there um and the final uh kind
of area of infrastructural focus for us
is new systems of measurement so current
currently when uh Arts organizations are
being funded there you know the the key
metrics attached to uh the funding tend
to uh center around footfall um or you
know kind of yeah online visits what if
it's an online work uh or equally you
know some sort of PR visibility for the
uh funding partner for the F funding
entity um and of course that's that's a
very kind of poor vision for the ways in
which uh the art Field's impact can be
measured um and if we think about the
art field as being an empowered
contributor to critical questions on Art
and technology and to actually have an
R&D uh capacity kind of latent or
dormant within it uh then we need to
come up with new systems of measurement
new ways of understanding how uh to
account for the possible impact of that
R&D
so um as I said you know we kind of
transitioned future art ecosystems from
a project that was primarily focused on
um annual strategic briefings that were
introducing this like very different
vision of the role of the art field uh
in society to a platform for incubating
uh specific infrastructural prototypes
um and so currently we're working on two
very interesting projects uh these are
bigger Partnerships with quite a few
organizations on board
uh one is um sort of under the rubric of
uh the bucket that I had just shown you
ownership and distribution models and
that's partial common ownership it's a
develop we developed a stewardship
technology together with an organization
radical exchange uh I actually believe
Matt who is uh my main partner on this
organization uh spoke here about it last
year um and what partial comant ship is
trying to do is to kind of allow artists
whose practices are deeply entangled
with certain critical um issues or with
certain communities to be able to return
value to those communities and for um
the collectors who are interested in
supporting these types of practice to
kind of account for the contributions of
these contributors these communities or
these kind of underlying issues are um
are kind of channeling towards the AR
work uh by by kind of transforming their
relationship to the artwork from one of
private property to one of stewardship
um another uh project that we're working
on uh also with and it's a multiparty
project is a coral AI Data Trust So
currently my larger team the r
technologist team is working with artist
Holly hearnen and Matt dryhurst on a new
commission uh which will open a
serpentine in October and uh as part of
this commission the artists are
developing a coral AI model um and we
supported the development of a curated
data set for that Coral AI model um and
the coral AI Data Trust experiment is
meant to sort of address some of the
really problematic questions that
currently exist in uh the agency that um
data subjects have uh Visa V AI training
so we're working with uh various um with
with lawyers and also Civic
organizations on a framework for uh
setting up Collective data and IP rights
and as we're sort of incubating this in
a fairly safe kind of non-adversarial
environment of an art project um you
know it kind of it allows us to
experiment with rather like Edge case
scenarios of legal application in a way
that is probably kind of not really
possible in the real world quote unquote
yet nonetheless uh were able to derive
insights about the limitations of the
law or like the possible testing grounds
where certain new Solutions are required
uh in a very direct way and you know
that in will allow us to produce policy
recommendations okay so I think I did
well and I have exactly 5 seconds left
and please do stay in touch
[Applause]
Victoria oh take a step this way if you
don't mind um one thing that I've never
asked you but I always wanted to ask you
this was such the future art EOS was
such a massive sprawling and
comprehensive project how did you as a
research and development strategist
begin to plan and execute something at
this scale like how do you start
something like this
uh being slightly
delusional um yeah I mean I I I think
there is just um there was a lot of
energy I think in
2018 um in the organization where where
I'm still working to uh try new things
um and you know because I've been
focused on like attempt to develop an
infrastructural practice in the art
field for the for 10 years before that
and no institution was in interested I
think when I got to serpentin and there
was a space to do this work I just
thought like why not so I think um in
some ways you know the scale of future
ecosystems is slightly unrealistic and
so that's what has led to us focusing on
very concrete collaborations that these
prototype project but um you know it's
meant to be an invitation to every
organization out there to contribute
like towards these vectors that I spoke
about new ownership models new sets of
measurement Etc in whatever way they see
fit and also kind of in this way it's
really meant to be an ecosystemic
project rather than something that just
Serpentine does and Shout out great area
you can read insights from myself and
Barry through um in one of the volumes
so definitely don't miss it yeah and
number two thank you so much Victoria I
really appreciate it one more round of
applause for Victoria I know of everyone
[Applause]